Essay Prompt:

All too often, companies hire outside consultants to suggest ways for the company to operate more efficiently. If companies were to spend more time listening to their own employees, such consultants would be unnecessary.

Write a response in which you discuss the extent to which you agree or disagree with these statements and explain your reasoning for the position you take. In developing and supporting your position, you should consider ways in which the statements might or might not hold true and explain how these considerations shape your position

Essay Response:

There has been a trend in the business that corporations should hire consultants to improve companies' performance. For example, it is not surprising to find among big companies such as JP Morgan and Goldman Sachs the hiring of outside business consultant or strategists to assist their business. In addition, many consultant companies, such as Capgemini are established to help companies to achieve their business initiatives. However, such way of improving the business could be substituted by a better one, namely that employer should spend more time listening to the advice of their employees. It is more reasonable because hiring additional people to assist in operation of a business is both costly and troublesome, and employees can bring valuable ideas to the table. 

Hiring additional consultants is costly because normally it takes more time and resources to train those people so that those consultants could be more familiar with the companies' business. For example, there used to be a startup in Madison called Spandex.io. They had a very good business concept. But its two founders were not very good at business. Instead of listening to the one of their financial employee's advices, they decided to hire a outside consultant for helping the financial operation of the company. Bringing in this consultant cost them fair amount of money each month. Additionally, to train this person to become more familiar with the business, it took them a month to get him on track. The result is that by the time this outside consultant had a better understanding of how the business works, the company had already missed the important funding opportunity, which eventually caused the company to be bankrupted. Therefore, hiring additional consultant will be time-consuming as well as costly. 

Besides the high cost that comes with hiring outside consultants, the fact that consultant is not a company’s property implies that they might not be dedicated to their works. It is not sure how devoted consultant will be to the given tasks compared to a company's employee. For instance, the company my father worked in hired a consultant before. However, during the workday he usually took calls from other companies where he was also helping their business. The result of this causes both companies to fire him due to his inability to perform well in the job he was assigned. 

Not as costly and troublesome as hiring outside consultants, listening to employees is a better way for company to get advice. This is true because they work for the company that can trust them. For example, Facebook, a well-know social networking company and tech-giant, hosts company wise conference every month, in which the management gathers all of its engineers in the headquarter to listen their opinion about how to improve the company. Because of this format, management leaders are able to make decisions that are more relevant to the problem engineers have discovered for the users. As a result, the company keeps growing and is still the top social networking site in the world without too much costs and troubles suffered from companies with outside consultants. Therefore, getting advice from employees will be more helpful because of the employee's familiarity with the company.

All in all, it is not a sound idea to hire outside consultants because of the additional cost and troubles, and lose of valuable ideas from company's employees. To improve the business, company should trust the advice from its employees and make better decision of whether to spend additional time and financial resources to improve its performance. 
